General – 
Other Caribbean islands have their own traditions and meanings.  The differences can often be seen in the costumes, the events and the music.  While the Carnival costume in Trinidad has steadily moved from the traditional masquerade characters to a more scanty bejeweled bathing suit combination, similar modifications can be seen on other islands.  The fetes and activities tend to be similar: soca monarch – a multi-level competition to crown the ‘best’ soca artist/song of the season; panorama – a celebration of steel pan music; parade of the bands – the ultimate Carnival day itself where participants dance with their bands along the parade route in their costumes; fetes – parties, large and small, leading up to the Carnival day.

Oftentimes outside of the Caribbean islands, the Carnival festivities in other cities attempt to replicate those that are held in Trinidad – especially if the initiation of the Carnival in that city was pioneered by Trinidadians.  The staple activities will usually be held – fetes, parade of the bands, playing soca music and where possible, j’ouvert.  This can be seen in the major North American and European Carnivals (New York, Toronto, Notting Hill).  In other instances, the Carnival is a series of fetes leading up to a parade of bands that is not specifically focused on Caribbean culture – but does include a Caribbean float or two  as is the case in Rotterdam and Berlin.

Mas –
The BIG day . . . the reason for the season.  All the workouts to get in tip top shape and have the ‘carnival body’ culminate in this day.  On this day, I rise early to get makeup done. Once my friends and I are dressed in our costumes and ready – we go ‘n the road’ to find our band(s).  Each of us has registered with a masquerade band – usually the same one so we can all be together. In addition to our costumes, we’ve been supplied with wristbands that entitle us to whatever amenities are associated with our particular band – food, beverage, security, etc.



J’ouvert –
Up and out in the streets before dawn, dressed in clothing I don’t intend to wear again with baby oil covering any exposed skin. . . . Why??  Because that’s how j’ouvert morning starts for me in Trinidad. I am prepared to get mud, powder, paint or chocolate thrown or smeared on me by friends and strangers as I do the same to them.  Fueled by alcohol, a mini-breakfast and the on-going soca rhythms that blast from the large speakers on the large trucks, the energy is electric and save for the fact that it’s pitch black outside, there’s no indication that the day has not officially begun.  

Similar to the parade of bands or ‘pretty mas,’ we register to participate with a particular j’ouvert band.  Each band takes a particular route and supplies its members with the themed product, breakfast and alcohol. Consistent with the term ‘dutty mas,’ you chip down the road to the soca and smear others with whatever product has been supplied.    This continues well after the sun has risen – about 10AM.  In addition to actual j’ouvert, there are j’ouvert-themed parties.  While you may not be chipping down the road, along a parade route, you will still have the benefit and exhilaration of soca music while you dance and sling mud, powder, chocolate or paint on other party-goers.  In other cities that I’ve visited for Carnival, at least one promoter will host a j’ouvert party if an actual j’ouvert road event is not scheduled.

The history and meaning behind j’ouvert is much greater than the festivities I’ve described here.  Below is some background and history.
